WPP Tracing for C++ Universal Store apps
========

The [Windows trace PreProcessor](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/ff556204(v=vs.85).aspx) (WPP) provides high-performance tracing for C++ apps. It has low impact on binary size and CPU usage -- even when tracing is turned on -- which makes it suitable for both Debug and Release builds. It is however difficult to set up, especially in Universal Windows/Windows Phone Store apps. This project tries to address that issue.

## Initial setup

Start by installing the WPP Tracing NuGet [package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/MMaitre.TraceWpp/). The package adds a header to the VS project (TraceWpp\TraceWpp.h) and an MSBuild target generating .tmh trace headers during the build. Also install the [WDK](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/hardware/hh852365.aspx) to get required WPP config files.

If using GIT, add '*.tmh' to .gitignore to avoid checking-in generated headers.

Then create a GUID to identify the trace provider via the 'Tools > Create GUID' menu in Visual Studio. In the following {B5DBB673-AB73-48A3-B004-B8902FA191C3} is used a provider GUID.

In the pch.h precompiled header define the trace provider:

```cpp
// {B5DBB673-AB73-48A3-B004-B8902FA191C3}
#define TraceWpp_Guid (B5DBB673,AB73,48A3,B004,B8902FA191C3)

#define WPP_CONTROL_GUIDS \
    WPP_DEFINE_CONTROL_GUID(TraceWpp_CtrlGuid, TraceWpp_Guid, \
    WPP_DEFINE_BIT(TF_Default) \
    WPP_DEFINE_BIT(TF_EntryExit))

#include "TraceWpp\TraceWpp.h"
```

TraceWpp.h defines a set of tracing macros:

- Trace
- TraceFlag
- TraceLevel
- TraceHr
- TraceScope
- TraceScopeCx
- TraceScopeHr

The first four provide printf-style traces with various parameters. The last three trace function calls.

In each cpp file add as last include the trace header generated by the preprocessor, whose filename is the cpp filename with a '.tmh' extension appended to it.

```cpp
#include "TraceWpp\foo.cpp.tmh"   
```

When creating a Store app, add the following code to initialize and shut down the trace provider (replacing 'AppName' with some appropriate value):

```cpp
App::App()
{
    WPP_INIT_TRACING(L"AppName");
    Trace(L"@%p Starting", (void*)this);
}

void App::OnSuspending(Object^ /*sender*/, SuspendingEventArgs^ /*e*/)
{
    Trace(L"@%p Stopping", (void*)this);
    WPP_CLEANUP();
}
```

When creating a Windows Runtime Component DLL, add a file called module.cpp to the VS project with the following content (replacing 'DllName' with some appropriate value):

```cpp
#include "pch.h"
#include "TraceWpp\module.cpp.tmh"

BOOL WINAPI DllMain(HINSTANCE instance, DWORD reason, LPVOID reserved)
{
    switch (reason)
    {
    case DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH:
        DisableThreadLibraryCalls(instance);
        WPP_INIT_TRACING(L"DllName");
        Trace(L"@ DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH");
        break;

    case DLL_PROCESS_DETACH:
        Trace(L"@ DLL_PROCESS_DETACH");
        WPP_CLEANUP();
        break;
    }

    return TRUE;
}
```

In VS projects targetting Windows, add advapi32.lib as imported static lib under 'Configuration Properties > Linker > Input > Additional Dependencies'. In Windows Phone VS projects the required static libs are already properly imported.

Disable 'Edit and Continue' used in Debug builds as this breaks WPP trace macro generation: under 'Configuration Properties > C/C++ > General > Debug Information Format' replace 'Program Database for Edit And Continue (/ZI)' by 'Program Database (/Zi)'.

## Adding traces

similar to printf():

```cpp
Trace(L"@%p Starting", this);
```

If the object traced is a C++/CX one, the $this$ pointer needs to be cast to $void*$.

## Recording traces

### Windows

run elevated:

```
logman.exe create trace mytrace -p {B5DBB673-AB73-48A3-B004-B8902FA191C3} 0xff 5 -ets -o trace.etl
```

where {B5DBB673-AB73-48A3-B004-B8902FA191C3} needs to be replaced by the GUID of the event provider. The '-pf' option allows passing a list of providers stored in a config file with one set of 'GUID flags level' per line.

```
logman.exe stop mytrace -ets
```

logman.exe is located under %windir%\system32 and typically already in the path.

### Windows Phone

Field Medic [blog]({{ site.url }}/2014/12/01/field-medic-custom-logging.html)
[profile]

## Formatting traces

Once recorded, traces need to be formatted to convert binary trace files (.etl) to text files (.log). The process is the same whether traces were recorded on Windows or Windows Phone.

Extract .tmf trace format files from .pdb symbol files:

```
tracepdb.exe -f *.pdb -p c:\Symbols\TraceFormat
```

Format .etl binary traces into text traces:

```
set TRACE_FORMAT_SEARCH_PATH=c:\Symbols\TraceFormat
set TRACE_FORMAT_PREFIX=[%9!d!]%8!04X!.%3!04X! %4!s! %!FUNC!
tracefmt.exe -f trace.etl -o trace.log
```

The tools are available in the Windows SDK, under '%ProgramFiles%\Windows Kits\8.1\bin\x86' on 32b machines and '%ProgramFiles(x86)%\Windows Kits\8.1\bin\x64' on 64b machines.

TRACE_FORMAT_PREFIX can be customized using the format specifiers documented [here](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/hardware/ff553941(v=vs.85).aspx). The format used above is '[CpuNumber]ProcessID.ThreadID Time FunctionName'.

## Analysing traces

[TextAnalysisTool.NET](http://dlaa.me/blog/post/3450647) , [MF](http://blogs.msdn.com/b/mf/archive/2010/09/09/analyzing-media-foundation-traces.aspx)
